Nicholas.
Samiksha
other students.
I need you just to send me a
feedback, I mean.
Sen Ron Dennis.
Jason Alicea Cool.
So.
Uh.
Let's start with the I mean
quick review or quick recap of
what we said. I mean in the last
session on Monday. Um, generally
we started with the numbering
system that there is there no
negative numbers. We had only
integer part and a fraction
part. And we could do, I mean
normal arithmetic, such as
subtraction or addition. The
only exception was that when we
did subtraction, it might end up
with the last borrow and again
in order to have a correct
answer, we have to apply the
last borrow. I mean doing another
subtraction from the that higher
number. So then the result
becomes negative and the correct
result actually ends after the
second subtraction. Then you
said that we wanted to have a
numbering system with negative
numbers. So we introduce sign
magnitude system which we
allocate the highest position as
a sign. So the highest position
loses its value. It just shows
the sign if it is zero in means
that the number is positive, it
is non zero. It means that that
the number is negative and if we
are in base 10, for instance, we
could use any non zero values,
for instance 1238.
As as indication of the negative
number. And you said that in
sign magnitude we have the
normal. I mean, uh, arithmetic.
But the only difference is that
we have to 1st determine the.
Sign of the result.
So based on the fact that we are
adding two positive number or to
negative number the I mean the
sign would be positive or
negative or let me.
Make my.laser
my laser point, yes.
And if we are doing addition a
positive number with a negative
number, we said that we have to
wait until at the end of the
result. If the result has a
borrow, it means that the first
number is smaller than the
second number. The result is
negative. We put one here or any
non 0 value here and then we do
another subtraction without
borrowing without higher number.
For the subtraction, the easiest
one is this. I mean, subtracting
a negative number from a
positive number, so subtraction
of a negative number becomes
positive, so the result is
positive and we do normal
addition. But the exceptions are
when we are subtracting a
positive number and a negative 2
positive numbers and two
negative numbers. So again we
have to wait until to see that
the first number is smaller or
lower. For positive numbers, if
you do the subtraction, if the
first number is lower than the
second number, the result is
negative. It it produced a last
borrow, so we have to do another
subtraction with that higher
number to have a correct result.
And for the subtracting two
negative numbers, because
subtracting a negative number
becomes positive, so it means
that minus X a negative number
here plus. Subtracting a
negative number becomes a
positive number plus a
positive number, which means
that a y - X here and again
it may introduce a last
borrow and then you have to
apply the bottle and based on
the borrow you have to
determine these signs.
So we did some practices and
reset that there is a chance for
overflowing sign magnitude and
it happens when you do the
addition. And the addition
actually creates a carry last
Carrion that Carry goes to this
sign position. But as I said,
the sign doesn't have any value.
If you put the Carry resulted
from the addition to the sign, it
may change the sign of the
number. If it is positive, it
make the Carry make it, I mean
negative, or if there's a Carry
goes to the sign position. If it
is negative, 1 + 1 becomes 0, so
it changes the sign from
negative to positive.
Or in this case, if you, I mean
again, another carry produces
from this addition. It makes it
a, 1 + 0 one, so make it a
positive number negative number,
so overflow in signed magnitude
happens when you are doing
addition and there is a last
Carry and that carry goes to sign
position and change the sign.
We did a little bit practice
there and then. You said that.
Uh, because uh, sign magnitude
waste, a lot of possibilities
for numbers of We want to
improve the system and the
improved system was signed
compliment in order to make a
sign compliment numbering system
having positive and negative
number without any waste. We
introduced diminished radix after
diminished radix we introduced.
The.
Radix complement radix
complements were basically based
based on the diminished radix,
meaning that you applied. It
diminished radix and then plus
one. So, uh, whenever you're
asked to do a radix complement
r's compliment. You can do this
calculation directly r to the
power of N minus n, or you can
do the diminish complements plus
one. Usually in practice this is
small. I mean easier because the
diminished radix  means that
subtracting each digit from the
largest digit and then when you
end with the diminished radix
complement, you just add 1 unit.
So we did practice in base 2 IN
base two diminished radix is
ones complement, which means
that just negate or invert.
Inversion, you have to just apply
not or invert each digit if it
is zero, it becomes one. If it
is 101, it becomes zero and then
at the end you add 1 unit.
So in we practice on the
other basis base 4 IN base
for it means that you apply
the diminished radix, freeze
complements or each digit
minus three, and then you
just add 1 unit.
In the base 10, and we practice an
in total I mean in general r's
complement of this are means that
diminish radix r minus ones
complement plus one.
And then you said that we can
use the radix complements as as
a way to represent negative
numbers without wasting any
positions. So we said that we
can give up some positive
numbers for negative
compliment of that number.
For instance, we can give up 9
for the 10s complement of nine,
which is 1 and make it negative.
So minus one we can give up 8
for its negative complements 10's
complement, so it becomes minus
two and etc. So this way without
wasting any possibility for a
number, we can have both.
Positive and negative numbers.
but the thing is. For
instance, if you are in base 10.
If we are given in the, uh,
signed ten's complements
numbering system, all the
negative numbers are also is
still in the positive. I mean
figures or in a positive
illustration. But we interpret
them as negative numbers, so.
We did practice inside a 10s
complement base 10.
So just one hint.
In the questions or in when
you're buying a computer system,
or etc. First, you might say
that the system is base 10. It
means that it only has positive
numbers in base 10.
But you might, uh, it might have
more specifiers if you might
ask. For instance, it says sign
magnitude base 10 it means
that it has negative number, but
in in sign magnitude system.
But the I mean so far the best
system we have is for instance. If
you're in base 10, it is signed
10's, complement base 10
meaning that we have negative
and positive numbers and the
negative numbers are represented
as the ten's compliment.
So.
I said, I mean when we have a
base 10 and in order to
represent negative numbers in an
10's complemented we just
have the range of the numbers
the first half.
Are the positive numbers. We
don't do anything.
But the second half.
Are negative and we have to
in order to interpret them,
you have to apply the ten's
compliment to find to find
the negative numbers and put
the negative sign here.
Uh, so. And base 10 and given
first and seven position. We
said that this is the maximum
number divided by two so if the
number is between zero and this
number. It means that the number
is positive and if it is more
than this number up until the
maximum number that's a negative
number. This is an example. We
said that if you are given 7
position, the maximum number
gonna be this.
Divided by two, this is the
maximum number divided by two,
becomes this and because this
given number is greater than
this, the number is negative.
And in order to interpret it
into a correct negative number,
we have to apply 10s complement.
So although we showed the number
by positive number, but in fact
this is interpreted as negative
number and this is the negative
number. Your reverse, if we are
given a negative number and we
wanted to represent it in a
ten'ss complements base 10 so we
have to represent because this
is negative, we have to show it
as a positive. So we have to
figure out what's the positive
complement of this and the
positive compliment. Just apply the
ten's complement on that which
is. Which means that just
applying nons compliment plus
one, an applying nine's compliment
is that just subtract.
Each digit from the largest
digit 9 + 1. This is the number
we have to put in the positions
to be interpreted as the
negative 3,000,000 something.
So. We did another
example in base 16.
And in general, we said that,
uh, in r's compliment base r
we have negative numbers, but
the negative numbers are
represented as positive numbers.
But I find r's compliment.
Uh.
As let me there, I mean we said
that in general, if you are in base
R. So the first half gonna be
from zero to r to the power of N -
1 / 2, and we said that if you
are in base two it this number
becomes this number. The first
is zero and the other is 1. If
we are in base four it becomes
1, three in other positions and,
etc. But in this slides last
session, I said that let me
bring this slide here.
This is the slot for the last
session. I put a formula here
which basically says that in
any base r numbering system
or to the power of N - 1 / 2
becomes this number.
And this number is not always
right, so anybody can.
Say why this formulation or
why this number is not
writing all bases?
Have you ever applied? I mean,
uh, for base, for instance 3.
I'm waiting for your
answer the students.
So let me share my.
My camera.
So I was designing the lecture
for this week and I put some
questions regarding the I mean
sign Mag sign complement
negative numbers. And.
in base 2 the maximum if we are
given for instance two positions
or three position.
for instance, you are given n is
equal to 3. The maximum number
gonna be 2 to the power of 3 -
1, which is basically means that
putting the largest digit in all
the positions so 111.
Divided by two.
So which is basically means
this. I mean 8 - 1, seven 7 /
2 which is equal to. As you can
see in this formula it becomes.
Seven by two in the
decimal system.
Becomes a three.
So three in by
three positions becomes 011.
So it works perfect for bases
that the bases are.
Even.
Because if the base if the.
Base are, even when things r and
R, is even is that 2
multiplied by some numbers.
r minus one becomes odd and
because of that.
You you gonna end up with such
a? I mean a number I mean.
Let me put it in the General 4.
If you are.
In base R.
The largest digits gonna the
largest number gonna be r
minus one r minus one up until
the last digit of the last
position r minus one.
So if you divide this .2.
This is the.
Largest digit.
Largest number.
It depends whether r minus one
can be divided by two, or no
if it can be divided by two. It
means that this is a number kind
of two multiplied by another. I
mean integer #2Q.
If you do a division, so two
Q as a even number divided by
two produces no remainder. So
basically it becomes q.
And then comes here, there is no
remainder and then the next
digit r minus one. And again
because this is a number.
This is a even number you can
easily divide it by two without
any remainder. So it becomes Q
and etc. So it ends up with Q.
Here, so let's do a practice.
If, for instance we are in base.
5.
The largest digits gonna be
444 up until the last
digit. And if you divide this
number. In base five by two.
It becomes to two up
until this number.
So this is the largest digit for
the first half.
And this is the maximum
number in base 5.
However. If you are given.
A base.
Or which r minus one
is not even it's odd.
For instance in base.
Uh.
Four R - 1 the largest digit
gonna be 333 up until the last
position three. So r minus one
is is an odd number, so you
cannot easily divide by two. It
produces a remainder one.
So this is kind of true.
Q. Plus the number.
When you divide this number by
two, it produces Q.
And the remainder one, and then
the next number comes down. It
becomes or minus one.
So if you are in base r this
has the significance of our so
it becomes r plus r minus one,
so it becomes two R - 1. Now
this is the new number that you
have to divide by two.
So you cannot Simply put R
Because. If you put r count
through r which is greater
than two R - 1.
So you have to put a number or
minus one here so it.
becomes.
Two r minus two, and now you
can do the subtraction, so
produces another remainder. So
that's why you end up with r
minus one in other numbers, but
the first one gonna be r minus
1 / 2.
So.
Let me back to the slides.
So this formulation Here is not
going to be true for the bases
that are odd, because odd minus
one become even an even number
divided by two produces no
remainder. So be careful about
that, but it is true for these
bases. So in the lecture
assignment for today, which is
going to be released today, the.
there are some practices for odd bases.
So let's back to the slide.
So then he said that I mean
this second half of the range
of numbers, although they are
showing positive number, but we
have to interpret it as a
negative numbers. And whenever
you want to see that the given
number is a positive or
negative, we have to find the
first half an if it is less
than the first half, it means
that that's a positive number,
and if it is more than the
first half, it is a negative
number and we have to apply the
radix complement to figure out
what's the negative number.
So now we wanted to do the
arithmetic in signed
complement system. So.
Guys, I'm I'm. I'm seeing you
are putting some questions I I
will. I will give I mean amount
of I mean after this topic I
will answer your questions and
Sean can moderate the questions
so please put your questions in
the chat box and I will answer
all of them.
Thank you so the next topic is
this. Uh, we wanted to
do arithmetic addition or
subtraction signed complements,
numbering system. The beauty of
signed compliment is that when
you do addition or subtraction,
there is no other special cases
for the addition. You simply add
2 numbers. You don't pay
attention that the numbers are
negative or positive. You just
simply do the addition. Normal
addition as we did in the first
system without integer numbers.
For the subtraction.
Uh, because subtracting a
positive number, making a number
in a signed system complement
system, all the numbers are
showing positive. Although we
interpret some numbers negative,
but all of them are at least. I
mean when we represented digit,
they're all positive, so
subtracting from a positive
number, at least in in figures,
makes it negative. So in the
sign complement system, in order
to make in negative number, we
have to simply apply the r's
compliment on that number.
So basically when you do a
subtraction of two given number,
whether they are positive or
negative, you just simply do
another addition. But this time
you have to convert the second
number to r's compliments.
So and then, if the these two
summation produce a last carry,
just simply ignore that.
This is a very beautiful,
very simple and actually
works awesome without waste
of any position for the sign
system for the sign.
As I mean symbol.
So again, we don't. If we
wanted to build a computer
system to do the arithmetic
in sign compliment numbering
system, there is no need to
build 2 units one unit for
addition, one unit for
subtraction. We only need one
unit.
To do the addition and then we
have to build a unit to do the
R's compliment. So just all the
arithmetic reduces to 1 action
which is addition.
So let's practice.
Imagine you are given these two,
I mean numbers. Uh.
For just our hint, I just
wanted to know that the first
number is a negative or
positive. This is not necessary
for this calculation, but just
for hint we see that we are
given how many positions six
position. So the first half
going to be 2 to the power of 6
- 1 / 2, which is this number.
So because as using the formula
for us, it becomes zero in the
first position and one in other
positions. And this number is
greater than this number, so the
number is negative. So in order
to figure out what's the
negative number, this is the
negative number, which is equal
to minus 21 in base 10.
The second number we are given
this number, so we have to do
the padding to adjust the size
of the numbers. So we add a 0
here just to make it equal size.
And then do the. Let's figure
out what's this number. This
number is lower than the Max
the first half, so it's a
positive number.
And then again, these are for
just for our hint. We can start
the summation from the very
beginning. So we do this
summation 1 + 0 one 1120 here
carry here and then zero here
carry 111 becomes three so one
here and carry on etc.
So the result is just normal
addition of two numbers.
And then, uh.
In order to interpret whether we
have a true result, you have to
see that this number is greater
or lower than the first half.
So we see that this number is
greater than this number, so in
order to figure out what's the
correct negative number, we have
to apply the Two's complement,
which is this number. So
basically we show this, but in
fact this number is negative,
and this is the true negative,
which is minus 7, so.
Minus 21 + 14 becomes minus
seven I believe.
For the subtraction, as I said,
Subtraction must be converted to
addition, so the first number as
we already saw it was minus 21.
And the second number is +8 by
padding, and when we do the
Subtraction subtracting from a
number, it makes next in second
number negative. So we have to
make plus 8 as a negative.
If this number by any
chance was negative?
Subtraction from a negative
number makes it positive, so
again you have to apply the twos
compliment. We are in base two
so regardless of whether the
second number is positive or
negative, we always apply twos
compliment on the second number
when we are doing subtraction.
And by doing this, we make this
subtraction, uh? Into addition,
so in order to hear these are
the step. What's the negative
eight? You have to apply twos
complements. The twos compliment
on the this number becomes this.
So once compliment plus one
one's complement, just invert or
not each digit plus one which is
this now? So after applying the
two's compliment in base two for
the second number, the operation
becomes sum and then we do
normal summation so.
1 + 0 one one plus
010001 plus one becomes 2.
Uh.
There is an error here. I leave
yes it becomes 2 here must be 0
and then goes carry here and
then 1120 and carry 1 + 1 + 1
become three so one and carry.
And then if you have a carry, we
just ignore that and then we
have to interpret this. So I
make it through here, but this
one must be 0.
So this is, uh.
So we're done, that's it. So
let's see whether the result is
correct or not. So we have to
see whether this number is
greater than the first half. You
see that this number.
Have a one in the highest
position so it's larger than
this number and this is in fact
in negative number and this is
the true negative. After
applying the two's compliment.
And you see that this is
gonna be this number. This
number is 21.
And because it's greater than
the first half is negative, so
minus 29 so.
Without doing anything under
result, the number is negative
and the negative in the East End
is minus 29.
Inside a radix complements there
might. In some cases that we
have overflow. But the
cases for overflow for
complement system is
totally different from the
sign magnitude in sign
magnitude. If the last
Carry goes to the sign
position, because we have
signed position, so
that's an overflow, but in.
Compliment a systems.
The Rs compliment already
complement systems. The overflow
is not cannot be determined up
until the end of the calculation
where we have the result.
You have to check whether
the Addition result of two negative
numbers becomes positive.
Then then that's a That's a
overflow. Or if you are applying
2 positive numbers and the
result is going to be negative
is negative. So this is another
factor overflow. So in signed
complements numbering system.
Uh, there is no hint for you to
figure out the overflow happens
or not. Even if you have the
last carry, you just simply
ignore the last carry. You have
to check your number if the
number is within the, the result
is within the first half. That's
a positive and then you have to
check the first. This first and
second number when you do the
calculation. If the result is
positive but the first 2 number
is negative, this is an instance
of overflow. Or if the result is
negative, but the first 2 number
is positive, is another another
instance of overflow.
So let's have a look at
in an overflow instance.
Once again, if you're given
the first number exactly the
same as previous example,
which is minus 21 because
it's greater than 01111.
Uh, the second number is
positive because it's lower than
the that's first half in base 2.
So we are giving a subtraction
task, so for the subtraction
you have to make it at
addition. So in order to do
that we have to apply two's
compliment on the second number
or in another word you have to
make 14 negative. To do that we
have to just simply apply the
two's compliment on the second
number and this is the negative
number. So basically we change
the second number to this new
number.
In order to make the positive 14
two negative 14 an changed in
Subtraction to addition, and
then you're good to go with this
summation. So after doing summation
1 + 0 because 1110.
It becomes two, so it becomes
remainder 0 and a, Carry And,
etc. And the last you can see
that there is a last Carry,
Carry. We just simply ignore
that. And here is the result.
That's it. So now we have to see
an overflow happens or not. So
we have to figure out the result
is positive or negative.
This number is lower than the
first half, so they are not. The
result is positive. So we are
given two negative numbers.
But the last result is positive,
so this is an instance of
overflow. When we overflow
happens, we said that do not
look at the result. The result
doesn't have any meaning and we
have an instance of overflow.
So again, an act of overflow
happens in signed complement
system whenever you do the
addition an after the applying
the addition. Is sign of the
result is different from the
sign of the first 2 numbers?
Ah.
Actually we are done with the
sign complement numbering
system, so I'm ready for your
questions if there's any.
Sean, if there's any question
there was an earlier one.
Long should the lecture assignments
take us to complete?
One week
I can. I'll answer your
question regarding the lab
assignment or lecture
assignments. I mean in the end
of today's lecture. So if
there's any question regarding
the topics in the current
lecture.
I I don't see any questions OK?
I will go to go one, so
let's go to the next topic.
In the first chapter.
We are we have a another topic
called Binary Code.
We want to cover it today or we
can. We will cover this when we
in the later lectures when we
are building a computer system
and then you can see how binary
codes are helpful. But we're not
going to cover it today and we
are. Done with the first
chapter.
So.
We can go to the second chapter
and started a new topic, so let
me open my slides.
One more thing, actually I I
fixed this in the PDF file for
the slides in the last lecture
an I'll post it today in the
blackboard. So let me go to the.
Second presentation.
So.
This is the new chapter an now
the actual work in this course
actually start. Oh
within the first chapter we said
that a human individual within
the history wanted to analyze or
process informations which were
basically continuous in the real
world. So they already build
some system that can represent
or show the continuous entities
or quantities. And those
systems are called a analog
systems, so any system
working with the continuous
entities called Analog.
Uh, for instance.
Uh, in a radio station, when is
speaker talks to a microphone?
In the old I mean, uh systems,
basically, behind the microphone
there were a I mean power source
or voltage, and based on the
volume of the speaker when her
when she was talking or he was
talking to the microphone it
changes the voltage. I mean
Digree but continuously within
the time. And then,
uh, it converted.
This converted to the waves and
then in the receiver you receive
the waves and then
restructuring. Reconstruct the
voltage in a continuous way
within the time in order to hear
whatever I mean it's talkin the
radio station. So I might I'm
not sure you remember those
systems, but I mean in.
A 1950s or 1940s or even
I mean very recently. All these
systems were analyzed based on
the processing or showing the
continuous way of the I mean
entities or quantities. But as I
said, in order to process a
continuous entity. In order to
analyze and process it and do
calculation with them, we need
to break the continuous entity
into discrete units and then we
have to represent them by some
symbols or digits. And you said
that the discrete systems or
digital system actually.
Ah, were built.
So. Today's topic is about how
can we build a digital system.
In order to do the
calculations with our
numbering system in the first
chapter.
For instance, if you are
representing the most distance
to the sun in order to
represent the distance and do
some calculation on the
distances, so we need to build
a machine to do for us instead
of just doing on the paper.
So the first source of energy in
order to plug into our system to
work is electricity.
And the theory is coming from
the numbering system we covered
in the first chapter. So now we
have power source which is
electricity and we have Theory
numbering system. We want to
build a digital system.
So the first question is this
what? This is we have to pick
from the numbering system. This
one base two under system base,
one base 10 decimal system base.
Two binary system.
So what would be your answer to
this question when you wanted to
build a digital system? What
would be your choice of a base
for the numbering system?
Simran says that base 2.
But base two is kind of A.
Unfamiliar for human beings,
you know, uh, if you are given
a binary digit, for instance,
011020111 series of binary
digits are. That was not the
base that you were taught in
the high school.
So.
At the first, Taylor says that
bastan. As we see with the as
we saw before, I mean within the
history the the most common
basis where based 10 and we
already know how to do
calculation in base 10 when
whenever we wanted to convert to
a new system you said that let's
look at the algorithm base 10
and get the idea from that. So
base 10 is much more easier for
us to understand because of our
background or because of the
history of human individuals. To
develop this system. So the
first I mean.
A choice would be base 10.
We'll see why we cannot build
or why we do not build the
system based on base 10, but
the first choice of us would be
based on because you know how
to do calculation base ten.
So in order to build a system
based on the electricity power,
so we could say that the
electric power can be
represented as the voltage and
then we can discretasize or
break the continuous entity the
voltage into discrete units as i
did here. So in order to split
this into base-10, we need 10
units; we could say that is the
voltage is between zero and one.
We say that this is unit zero.
If it is between one and lower
than two, it is unit 1 and up
until here, if the voltage is
changing between 9 and less
than 10, it means that we are
showing the unit 9. So we can
easily
Show different digits in base
ten by units of voltage
within a specific range.
Another continuous entity is
time. So let me just.
Make my mouse.
A laser point, yeah.
Another entity is time, so this is a
continuous entity. You have to
break it into discrete units so.
If the time is, for instance
weekly, we can break it into
daily if it is day, we can break
it into hours. If it is hours,
we can break it into minutes and
etc. So just for this example,
we could say that the first time
unit is within the unit 0 and
lower than one. It could be for
instance if the time is lower
than this first second, it
means that we are in the first
time slot in the zero or in the
first second if it is between
one and lower than two seconds,
it means that we are in the
2nd second
actually. 3 seconds, and, etc. So
this could be interpreted as
each one as the one second.
So putting these two discrete
units together, we have this
figure so. We are building each
unit. At each time interval, or
at each time slot.
For instance,
If you are going to see what
number this system is actually
representing you could say
that within this time for
instance, in this example, within
this time slot,
The voltage is changing
between 2 and
lower than three, so we could
say that the system is
representing the number 2.
How about this one? For
instance, in this time slot we
could say that within this time
interval, the voltage is
changing between 9 and lower
than 10, we say that the system
is representing 9, so basically
by controlling the changes of
voltage within the time
interval, we can represent
digits. So this is our first
computer system. We can build to
represent digits in unit base
ten. But the problem is that
because of the environment noise
or because of the limitation in
building engineering, we see
that if we are going to increase
the voltage from zero to another
unit, for instance 9, in order
to represent the number 9.
It takes time. And it passes through
different units and based on this
because the voltage is passing
different units, we cannot be
sure that what is going to be
this number. This number is going
to be ambiguous. The second one
is the same. For instance, in
this time slot, the voltage changes
from different units from 8
to 7 and to 6. So we are
not sure this number is going to be
7, eight or six.
So you see that there because of
the noise or because of the I
mean delay in producing
different voltages in our
system, lots of time
slots are ambiguous,
So what would be your
solution to solve this problem
in order to reduce these
ambiguous cells or values?
So what would be your?
Uh.
Solution if you wanna have a
more reliable system to reduce
these ambiguous cells.
The first solution would be
tackling the problem by
granularity. Granularity means
the size of each unit.
Starting with the time, we
could say that we can reduce the
granularity of time slots to a
smaller units and this way we
say that we give a little chance
to the voltage to change a lot
within one unit.
For instance, here for this cell
we give a very little chance the
voltage to change a lot and only
limited to the unit 6. So this
way you're trying to
reduce the number of ambiguous
cells. For instance, for this
one, for this cell, because we
we make the time slot
the smaller, the voltage has a
lower chance to change a lot and
be constrained to
just one unit. So then we can
represent it as three.
This is 1 solution, so just
having smaller time units.
So from the high
granularity to low granularity
relative with the time.
Another solution would be this.
Increasing the granularity of
voltage. So by increasing the
granularity of voltage we are
kind of allowing voltage to
change, but within one unit.
Look at this example within
these time slots.
Within these time slots you see
that although the voltages is
changing. But because we
increase the units of the
voltage. Uh, we can interpret
one number from changing within
this unit. Also from here you
see that because we are increasing
this unit to change the voltage from
this amount to this amount,
actually can be limited to one
unit, and we can represent them
as the first unit or 0.
So you see that the smaller
size of time slot and bigger
size of voltage actually helps
us to have less ambiguous
cells.
But the problem is
that if we increase the voltage
uunits, we are kind of
reducing the base number from
base-10. How many units we have
here, 4 units. 0123. So we are
moving from base-10 to base-4.
We know from the numbering
system theory that if we reduce
the base number, we are reducing
the range of numbers.
So the maximum number. For
instance, if we are given two
positions for base five, it's much
lower than if you are given the
same positions in base-10.
But the advantage is
that we have less, I
mean ambiguous cells.
In the extreme case, we could
split the voltage into 2 units.
So then we can damp or we
can address the changes of
voltage within the time and
then have we have much more less
ambiguous cells.
So. You can see that from zero
to 1 and then from one to
Infinity can be interpreted as
one. So, look at these
time slots, from this point to
this point, all the changes of
the voltage are gonna be
interpreted as one.
And for this one, all
these changes from this
point to this point can
be interpreted as zero.
So. You see that there's a trade
off. You have a higher basis for
base-10 or base 16, but it
this introduces a lot of
ambiguous cells or values
because the voltage is changing
a lot and minor changes may
change the unit number.
Uh, but instead you can
represent a wider range
of numbers in theory,
but in practice, there are
lots of ambiguous cells.
When you decrease the base
number to base-2, in theory
the maximum number is very
limited. But in practice,
you have much more less
ambiguous cells.
And this is the reason that in
practice, when the engineers
want to build a computing
machine or digital system,
they prefer to work with base
two, because it has more
reliability, or because it is
more robust to noise.
That's the only reason for
having computer system in base
two. If the engineers could
build a reliable system based on
base-10, we would have
computer machines based on base
10, the decimal system.
So the only limitation as I said
is hardware or engineering
problems. There is no problem
with the theory as we did cover
in the first chapter.
So this is the problem of
Engineers, not the problem of
computer scientists.
Indeed, in history the first
computing machine was built
based on wood.
The power was not
electricity, it was just
mechanical computing machine
by wood and it was based on the
ternary system or a system
which has three symbols: minus
1, zero and one.
In 1840 by Thomas Fowler. You
can see more history about
computer systems
with digital systems in these
links. Especially about
the ternary computers.
In fact, I mean at first, the
ternary computers were much more
better than the binary
computers. But later, because as
I said, the reliability,
they decided to build machines
only for base-2.
You might hear about decimal
computers. Uh, for instance, IBM
in the late 20th century in 19
something, they built computer
systems and they called them
decimal computers. In fact they
are not decimal computers. It's
a kind of misnomer for them.
They are not working in base-
10. Uh, they are accepted the
input from the user and they
printed the output to the user
based on the base-10, so the user
can think that these are the
computer that do the calculation
on base-10, but internally, the
hardware is working based on
base-2, binary.
Uh, based on the binary codes,
as I said in the first chapter,
we just move on from that, so
will cover them later and we see
that the binary codes are a way
to represent the decimal system.
But if you heard that we have a
decimal system computers and
the computers are working on
base-10, that's not correct.
The decimal computers, this
is a misnomer so they are kind of
called decimal computer, but
in fact they are not working
based on base-10.
That's why I made it grey.
Another important reason for
choosing the base-2 for
building a number system is
coming from philosophy or logic
or mathematics. In the
first chapter, we see how
mathematics can produce
different numbering systems. But
another reason comes from the
I mean logicians or philosophers
based on the true value of true
and false. There is a long
history behind this. Whenever we
put in a statement, we want to
say whether this statement is
correct or wrong. So again, 2
values. So.
George Boole was among the first
mathematicians and philosophers
that say that whenever you put
an argument in a text, you have
to verify this argument is true
or false, and this book, The
Laws of Thought.
He introduced Boolean Algebra.
An algebra which works based on
two values of true and false.
So from a deep history of
Boolean Algebra and from the
engineering perspective of
reliability, we make the
computer system based on
binaries.
Ah, this was the time that these
two actually joined each
other to make a computer
systems. Claude Shannon, this
guy is the I mean, one of the
biggest founders in computer
history or computer science.
He was a mathematician, so he
already knew the Boolean Algebra
and also he was an electrical
engineer. So he already knew how
to discreticize a Continuous
entity based on voltage, and
electricity power and he joined
these two disciplines to make a
computer system work or do
calculations based on binary
system, and he in the master
thesis. That's brilliant.
In his master studies, he
proposed switching algebra,
which which is basically using
the Boolean Algebra in
philosophy or in mathematics, for
doing calculation in a base-2
numbering system which is called
switching algebra, and that's
what we are going to cover today
and in the next lectures. So we are
trying to
build a computer system working
based on base-2 and having the
deep knowledge of the logicians
and mathematicians
from True and False theories,
and the numbering system.
So let's just start and build a
binary system. Or binary
computer.
As we said, I mean in our
example, we could
say that we can limit
the range of change of
voltage, for instance here from
0 V to +0.8 V, and we interpret
this as the unit 0.
And then if it is changed from
0.8 to two, he said
that this is a transition period
from a unit 0 to another unit 1.
So as long as the voltage is
within this range, we say that
you cannot
interpret this unit into any
unit or digits. And then if the
voltage is changing between 2
and 5, we can interpret this
as one. So this area,
deterministic area, is just for
engineering purpose because when
we build an electric
circuit, this is not perfect so
the there are some time to
increase from this voltage to
this voltage. So this is for
that because of the limitation
of the engineering products, and
this is called positive logic.
So when you have high voltage,
it is one. When you have low
voltage it is 0.
So.
Again, back to our original
system working based on
electricity and voltage. So in
order to just manipulate
changing the voltage within the
time. You could say that if the
voltage is very low, we can
interpret it as zero, and but if
it goes more than two to five we
could interpret it as one.
You can see here that because of
the huge unit of voltage for one
from two to five, even though the
voltage changes slightly, we still
can represent or
interpret it as the unit 1.
Also here, if there is a
slightly change for the low
voltage, still we can
interpret it as zero.
In another world, basically, if
you have very low voltage or no
voltage, it is the default value
which is zero, and if you wanted
to represent it by one, we have
to increase the voltage to a
value more than two.
Sometimes noise happens, and this is
because when we build a system,
we put it in an environment, for
instance, due to bad weather or
due to an impact of another
system to our system, suddenly
the voltage may go up. For
instance, you might experience
this in labs.
For instance, if you approach or
put a magnetic thing
toward a circuit. You
can change the current of the
circuit, because as you know
from physics, magnetic field
actually produces
current. So for instance
if in the environment, a
magnetic thing
approaches our system. it
may increase the voltage so
noise happen, so that's why I
mean. If noise happens, we can
not determine what is the number
for that period of time.
But, if noise happens
here, we can damp that,
or we can adjust that.
So this is the positive logic
that we are going to use to build the
binary system by changing the
voltage within these ranges.
And this is the I mean, uh,
circuits. So just putting a
battery of plus five voltage
here and the register here on the
ground, and the switch.
If the switch is connected, the
voltages becomes 0, so we
interpret it as zero. If we open
the switch, the higher voltage
goes out, so we can interpret it
as high voltage or one.
So just by building this
circuit, we can represent
zero and one.
We can have negative logic just
because it depends on our
interpretation. We can say that
if you have a low voltage we can
interpret it as one, and if you have
a high voltage, we can
interpret it at 0.
So this is called negative logic
and it's kind of just
inverting the previous system.
So whenever we see low voltage,
we can interpret it as one. If
you have high low voltage, we
represent zero. We can see that
in such a system, we don't need
to do anything as long as we
need to represent one because
low voltages ground. Whenever we
wanted to produce zero, we have
to increase the voltage to a
value more than two, so this
way, in this system, we have to
produce zeros. In the positive
logic, we have to produce ones.
And this is the I mean, uh,
circuits for producing zero and
one. Again, it's kind of
inverting the previous system.
But for our course, and even
most of these binary
computers or digital systems are
based on positive logic.
So for our course we picked the
positive logic. So high voltage
is 1, low voltage is zero, and
we pick the bottom-up
approach. What we mean by this
is that we wanna instead of just
zooming inside the chip, we want
to zoom back. So we want to
build the smallest unit of
binary units of a binary computer,
for instance, how we can do the
inversion? For instance, 0 to one
or one to zero, and then build
the larger units based on these
smaller units. So this is called
bottom-up approach and then at
the end of this course we're
going to build a unit that
acts like CPU in
computer systems. In the next
course, which is
Computer Architecture 2, you are going
to build another larger
binary system tht not only have CPU
but also have memory, IO and
etc. So this is called bottom-up
approach from the smallest units
to the larger units.
And.
One thing is that.
You might say that so we are
going to build a computer.
And before building a computer,
before going to the lab and then
wiring and using the
electricity power, we have to
1st design our computer in paper
and see whether the
design is working properly or not.
And then we go to the
manufacturing company and said
that let's build the computer system
based on my circuit.
And so design is before
developing or building a system.
And the Design Phase is very
important because if you can
design a system,
doing the same tasks, or
calculating the same
algorithm but with a smaller
number of units, it is much more
cheaper and it saves a lot of
costs in manufacturing process.
So and the fact is in Binary
Computers, a lot of methods in
mathematics can help us to
reduce the number of units, which
comes from Boolean Algebra.
So this is the task of computer
scientists or the discipline of
computer science: to design
computers with smaller units
or simple units, but
accomplishing the same task with
the same power. And then we give
this to electrical engineers or
computer engineers to build our
design. So in this course, and
even in the next course, we are
not going to build the computer,
so we never go and build the
digital circuit and
then put some wiring, put some
registers, put some deodes,
etc. So these are all tasks of
electrical and computer
engineers. In computer
science, we just wanted to
design efficient, simple
computers, but
prooving that this is an
equivalence computer
system that can do the
same task but with a smaller
or simple units.
So we design binary computers
in this course and the next
course, and we give the
building task to engineers.
So the first step in designing
binary system from a bottom up
approach is designing the gates.
And because we are using
the mathematical logic when
we are designing the gates,
it's called logic gates.
So let's start with the first
logic gates. But before that,
I'm happy to answer your
questions so far.
Are there any questions from you?
It seems there's no question,
so let's continue.
Ah, but before we continue,
let's, uh, make sure that
everyone has the focus to
the slides. So again, I
want to ask
you to send me some feedback.
Guys wake up.
Cool Leah. Thank you, Justin.
Yeah, Taylor, Alexa.
Thank you, Joseph.
Awesome, seems everyone has their
attention, so let's continue.
The first
logic gate we're going to
build is called
This. This is the first
logic gate we are going to
build this. Again in this course,
because we are at the design level, we
just put figures in order to
represent the units or the
gates. How is this gate gonna be end
up in manufacturing process or
in a physical perspective? This
is not our task. This is the
task of engineers.
So this is called NOTS.
Or a inverter or I mean an
inversion bubble as you can see
here, there's a bubble
here. We call this an inversion
bubble. And basically it does
the logical not on the input.
So whenever we have zero in the
input, it makes it one. Whenever
we have one in the input, it
makes it 0.
So we could say that not X or
inverter of the X or X
prime or X bar. So all these
notations are the same for this
gate or the operation of not.
Basically what it does is if you have a
low voltage in the input, this
device or this gate increase the
voltage to high voltage.
So if there's a low voltage in
the output, you gonna have high
voltage. If in the input there
is a high voltage, this unit or
this device is gonna reduce the
voltage too low voltage, so make
it 1 to 0. So that's the task of
this gate. How we can build
this? It's not our task.
And the thing is, the output is
usually represented as F
function and because we are
working on the binary system
which is using the Boolean
Algebra, we could say that this
is a boolean expression or
Boolean function, so F is called
Boolean function or Boolean
expression. Or you could say
that this is a binary function or binary
expression. And it's equal to X
Prime, which means that just
inverted version of the input.
So the immediate application of
this gate is using for one's
compliment. You remember we
wanted to use the one's
complement in order to calculate
the two's complements, so two's
compliment was one's compliment
plus one. So for now, using the
not gate or the inverted gate,
we can build a machine that does
the one's complement. So if you
are given the input XYZW.
Uh, just by this wiring and
attaching the not gate, you can
produce the one's complement of
the given number.
That's the immediate application
of the NOT gate.
By the way, this table is called
a truth table, uh, because it says
that all the combinations or all
the possibilities of input and
with what outputs. So this is called
truth table. So usually we are given
a gate or given an
operator, we usually add a truth
table to analyze the
functionality of the gate by
just analyzing what are the
inputs and if the inputs are for
instance, zero, what are the
outputs? So any gates we
introduce has a truth table. In
order to analyze the gates, the
functionality of the gates.
The next gate is gonna be
The second most important gate
AND, and we represent AND
by this figure. Please do
remember these figures, because,
uh, the next lecture, when we
design, we have to put our
design in a paper so that the
engineers know how to put the
gates in a physical perspective,
so you have to know the figures.
So this is the symbol or the
figure for the AND operator.
And the truth table is this.
Given all the
possibilities in the
input.
X and Y, 00011011, there's no other
possibilities, the output is gonna
be this. Basically the AND
operator
on the inputs. So you can easily
see that the AND is a binary
operator. It accesses 2 operands
and apply on the input operand
X and Y and outputs the X&Y. In
books, the AND can be
represented by dots or by
multiplication symbol, but
usually in our lecture or in
other books there's no need to
represent the AND operator. You
simply say that XY means that X
& Y.
And from the Boolean Algebra we
will cover next week, from the
Boolean Algebra we see that
X&Y is equal to Y&X, so you can
simply change the order of the
input and there is no change to
the output, so this property
is called commutative.
It is like multiplication in
decimal system. So the AND operator
is commutative. So all
these have the
same truth table.
And there are some interesting facts
about the AND operator.
If you add any number or any
input with zero, the result is
gonna be 0.
This is a huge benefit for
engineers because if they
wanted to see what is the
result, the only thing is that
if they see at least 1 zero,
they won't wait for other
inputs, they just simply output
0. So as long as you see at
least 1 zero, you don't have to
wait to see what are the other
inputs. Just simply output
0 because zero with
anything results with zero.
Again, here we see zero
in another input, so we
don't look at the other
inputs. Simply output 0.
The next interesting thing is
that you can add one with
anything without changing the
output. So if you add X with 1 on
the right side or on the left
side, there is no change in the
output. The output is still going
to be X and it depends on the X.
If X is 0, the result going to
be 0. If X is 1, the result going
to be 1. So this is the truth
table. So if the one input is
always one, the other input
actually matters. So adding
one with anything doesn't
change the result and doesn't
have any impact. It's kind of
padding in numbering system.
And adding anything with itself.
Doesn't change the result, so
X&X is equal to X.
Sometimes when designing,
if you put same input in both
the inputs, you
can simply use this notation.
X goes to both inputs of the
AND operator.
Another thing is that if you AND
an input with the negative,
sorry not negative, the inverted
version of X.
Uh, because if X is 0 the not of
the X is 1, produces zero, and if X
is one, the NOT is 0. So the
AND is gonna be 0. So whenever you
AND an input with its
inverted version, always the
result going to be 0.
So this is another interesting
fact of the AND operator.
The AND operator can be, uh,
showed like this, using the
inverted barbell. So we just put
X here and then we put here and
invented bubble means that X
prime. Or you can simply
says that F's output is always 0.
So we are done with today's, uh,
lecture so next week we're going
to continue further with
gates and by building these
small gates we want to build
larger units, working with these
gates. For instance, we want to
build adder or subtractor, do
the addition or subtraction for
us by these gates. So next week,
we're going to continue this
lecture. Uh, until then I'm
ready for your questions in the
office hour. Please do come
there and then
Ask your questions.
So if
there are any questions here.
From earlier there was someone
asking, can you explain
granularity again?
Oh granularity means that this,
that's go back to this slide.
Granularity means the size of
the unit. Uh, if you have a fine
grain unit, it means that it's
small granularity. If you have a
big size unit, it's called
called large. If you have larger
unit, it's called large
granularity, it's simply just the
size of the unit. You have to
split the continuous entity, for
instance here, for the voltage we
split the voltage into discrete
units. So the granularity here
is 1 unit from 9 to 10, eight
to 9. 7 to 8, OK.
But here the granularity is a
little bit larger, so
still from the zero to one. Sorry.
We could say
that from 0 to 5, from 5 to
10 and from 10 to 15. So
we are increasing the
size of granularity.
Or with the time,
for instance here.
This times is actually, if this is
just one hour, we split it into
these units, so it might be
minutes. Uh, so the granularity
is in terms of minutes larger,
but we could make the time slots
smaller so we could say that
these are seconds, so we have a
smaller granularity. So by
gravity, we just simply said that
the size of the units
break the continuous entity.
I hope I answered the questions.
So any other questions?
She was asking can we use the
5th edition of the textbook?
Yes for sure, because as I
said, I mean based on the
material we are covering.
There's no big difference
between the 1st edition and
the six edition, so you can
use the 2nd, 3rd, or 5th
edition, yes.
Any other questions?
Will we be programming a
processor, 8086 in machine
code in this class or in Computer Architecture
2, or neither?
Oh no, no, uh. This is for.
Uh, in the computer science
course, there is a course called
Assembly or machine language.
In that course they start to
teach you how to do programming
in a given processor. Usually
the given processor is 8086, and
they introduced the instruction
sets there and for
instance, it's like C language. They
say that how can you do for
loops or I mean how can you
define variables in assembly
language for the processor 8086?
So in that course you are going
to learn how to do code
in the given processor or Arch 2.
Yes, not in this course. Also,
in the Computer Architecture 2,
still you're working with
building the system, not coding
in that system. In the ending
chapters of Computer Architecture 2,
you become closer to
coding. But, the assembly
language or the machine language
in that course in computer
science programs, you have to
code in 8086.
So any other questions?
Does the midterm cover everything from textbook
chapters.
Yes, uh, we. I mean, for the
first chapter we covered all the
topics. The only topics we
didn't cover was the
Binary codes, we will cover it later
and for the 2nd chapter and the
next chapters, we're going to
cover all the topics, yes. Also,
I mean we are covering
additional topics, for instance,
those topics might be in the
assignment or practice in the
book, but we are going to cover
it in the lecture. In the lecture
assignments or in the
lab assignments, we're covering
some additional things that
are not in the book, so we're
covering much more topics
than the books, but we for
sure we cover all the topics
in the book.
And next question.
Like what
chapters are going to be
on the midterm. The midterm
actually is going to cover all
the materials up until the
session before the midterm.
So I believe the mid term is, I
mean next week we're gonna have
two other lectures.
Uh, then the week after that
going to be the reading week.
And then the first session after
the reading week is gonna be the
midterm. So all the topics so far
and the next week are gonna be
covered in the midterm exam.
Also please do look at the
discussion board. There might be
some questions from the
discussion boards. Also in the
lecture assignments, There might
be some questions from the
lecture assignments, so please
have a look at the lecture
assignment questions
and the discussion board.
So if there's no question, uh,
I'm going to be in the office so
you can join the office by
Blackboard and thank you so
much. Have a great day.
Bye everyone.